The claim that computer science is yet to make meaningful contributions to society is fundamentally incorrect, as computer science, like many scientific fields, has vast impacts across multidisciplinary fields, with its research and development being ultimately beneficial to many individuals and communities. The ongoing research and development of algorithms spans across decades, allowing algorithms to be varied and optimised for specific functions to increase their efficiency and therefore sustainability in its energy consumption. Furthermore, the optimisation of algorithms to subspecific tasks allows benefits across differing fields, having impacts on both afflicted individuals and research communities, benefiting scientific research itself. Computer science is deeply embedded into our modern society, and its continued development and research will only continue to benefit more people across its many applications.

The development and research of computer science is directly linked to its benefits across its varying applications, where the optimisation of algorithms can both be time and cost effective as well as ultimately being environmentally friendly. String search algorithms are one of the oldest and most well-researched algorithmic fields in computer science, being an umbrella term for a large number of different pattern matching algorithms adapted and optimised for differing purposes (Zhang, 2022). The Boyer-Moore algorithm, of which, is considered the standard benchmark of string-search, developed by Robert S. Boyer and J Strother Moore in 1977. It was created to combat inefficiencies in previous algorithms, such as the naive algorithm (Wikipedia, 2026),a brute force algorithm that searches every individual character of a string in order to locate its pattern. With a big O notation of O(mn), it would have to compare characters m*n times for a string sized m and a substring sized n (Mittal, 2026), which becomes prohibitively expensive for larger substrings and strings (Useful.Codes, 2025). As real-world applications require pattern matching in extremely large databases, where in the case of search engines it would be required to sort through gigabytes of data, it becomes increasingly inefficient despite its optimal space complexity in comparison to other algorithms. The Boyer-Moore algorithm, in comparison, uses a heuristic-based approach to skip lengths of texts determined by a pre-sorted lookup table (one per heuristic). It employs\'a0 a \'91bad character\'92 and a \'91good suffix\'92 heuristic to determine the length of text skipped following a mismatch (Gor et al., 2025). It holds a separate time complexity for its look up table - O(m) - though the cost is dismissable due to the string only requiring to be sorted once. The sorting itself has a worst-case time complexity of O(mn), occurring when the characters in a string and in a substring are identical, which is unrealistic in real-world examples. It also has a best case time complexity of O(m/n), as in practice it is an extremely efficient algorithm, performing better with longer strings (Wikipedia, 2026). It has a sublinear time complexity in comparison to the quadratic time complexity of brute force algorithms (Boyer et al., 1977). Furthermore, efficiency is imperative to consider when discussing energy efficiency, as not only does inefficient algorithms become costly and resource consuming, they can be environmentally harmful due to unsustainable energy usage and limits the usage of computational resources to more fruitful applications. Due to this, the development of algorithmic efficiency has made many meaningful contributions to society, increasing the sustainability of power usage in computing and increasing the efficiency of algorithms that are beneficial across fields.

Whilst it has multiple applications in spam filtering, search engines, network security (locating malicious patterns in network traffic), large-scale data processing and analysis, etc., one of its more noteworthy applications is in bioinformatics (Gor et al., 2023). Pattern matching algorithms, in general, are used in DNA sequencing to locate point mutations in the form of nucleotide substitutions, insertions or deletions. Sequence comparisons form the basis of the majority of fundamental genetical research, used in studying coronavirus strains, predicting genetic diseases, identifying cancerous cells, etc., benefiting both research communities and inflicted individuals (Rexie et al., 2022). Genome sequences are extremely long and similar, being up to 99% similar with control sequences, making it imperative to employ efficient algorithms to prevent worst case time complexities. Such occurs when similar patterns result in exceedingly unnecessary matches against the entire substring, an occurrence prevented in the Boyer Moore algorithm due to it skipping large lengths of text (Nsira, n.d.). Additionally, accuracy is critically important - specifically in the field of bioinformatics - as even minor errors can have adverse effects on the people affected. Aside from psychological harm, errors can induce clinical damage where inaccuracies can result in incorrect or unnecessary treatments, affecting individuals' trust in medical practitioners (Goodman, 2001). Since the Boyer Moore algorithm is a deterministic pattern matching algorithm, it has a 100% accuracy rate making it beneficial in the case of such ethical concerns. Variations of the boyer moore algorithm have been optimised for the specific function of DNA sequencing, a study showing it to be efficient when tested against 30,000,000 genome sequenced with fully deterministic results. However it is important to note that the nature of the boyer moore algorithm results in a trade-off between accuracy and efficiency, where its deterministic nature fundamentally restricts its ability to compete with the efficiency of other algorithms such as hashing based algorithms. DNA sequences have highly similar characters being repeated across the string, which fundamentally limits the Boyer-Moore algorithm's heuristical capabilities in skipping large lengths of text. Despite continuing to be more efficient than brute force algorithms, it reduces its capabilities against other pattern matching algorithms such as hashing-based pattern matching. However, hashing-based algorithms are limited in their own aspects, where despite their highly efficient nature they are probabilistic algorithms, and in rare cases can have collisions resulting in false positives/ negatives where two hashes describing the same string can align (Gaudvaram et al., 2006). This demonstrates the relationship between accuracy and efficiency, though in the specific context of bioinformatics and gene sequencing accuracy must be prioritised to benefit communities and public health. Medical practitioners and researchers have a responsibility to prove adequate and accurate care, relying on accurate algorithms to prevent harmful and unnecessary treatments to individuals. This demonstrates the importance of algorithmic developments, as their optimisation and adaptations to subspecific tasks benefits both individuals and research communities, benefitting scientific research as well as cost and resource efficiency.


Even in considering a minor subsection of computer science, it has vast multidisciplinary applications as well as benefits such as power consumption, genetic research, and cost/ time efficiency. It is an important field to be researched and studied, benefiting across differing fields of use. Therefore, computer science is an exceedingly important field, being deeply embedded into human development.